add `_tidb_rowid` document (#22572)
pingcap/docs: tidb-rowid.md

---
title: _tidb_rowid
summary: Learn what `_tidb_rowid` is, when it is available, and how to use it safely.
---

# _tidb_rowid

`_tidb_rowid` is a hidden system column that TiDB uses as the row handle for tables that do not use a clustered index. You do not declare this column in the table schema, but you can reference it in SQL when the table uses `_tidb_rowid` as its handle.

In the current implementation, `_tidb_rowid` is an extra `BIGINT NOT NULL` handle column managed by TiDB.

> **Warning:**
>

> > Do not assume `_tidb_rowid` is globally unique in all cases. For partitioned tables that do not use clustered indexes, `ALTER TABLE ... EXCHANGE PARTITION` can leave different partitions with the same `_tidb_rowid` value. If you need a stable unique identifier, define and use an explicit primary key instead of relying on `_tidb_rowid`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Do not assume `_tidb_rowid` is globally unique in all cases. For partitioned tables that do not use clustered indexes, `ALTER TABLE ... EXCHANGE PARTITION` can leave different partitions with the same `_tidb_rowid` value.
> - If you need a stable unique identifier, define and use an explicit primary key instead of relying on `_tidb_rowid`.
```

## When `_tidb_rowid` is available

`_tidb_rowid` is available for tables whose row handle is not a clustered primary key. In practice, this means the following table types use `_tidb_rowid`:

- Tables without a primary key

> - Tables whose primary key is explicitly defined as `NONCLUSTERED`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tables with primary keys that are explicitly defined as `NONCLUSTERED`
```

`_tidb_rowid` is not available for tables that use a clustered index, including the following:

- Tables whose integer primary key is the clustered row handle

> - Tables with a clustered index on a composite primary key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tables with clustered indexes on composite primary keys
```

```

## Write `_tidb_rowid`

By default, TiDB does not allow `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, or `UPDATE` statements to write `_tidb_rowid` directly.

```sql
INSERT INTO t(_tidb_rowid, a, b) VALUES (101, 4, 'w');
```

```sql
ERROR 1105 (HY000): insert, update and replace statements for _tidb_rowid are not supported
```

If you need to preserve row IDs during data import or migration, enable the session variable `tidb_opt_write_row_id` first:

```sql
SET @@tidb_opt_write_row_id = ON;
INSERT INTO t(_tidb_rowid, a, b) VALUES (100, 3, 'z');
SET @@tidb_opt_write_row_id = OFF;

SELECT _tidb_rowid, a, b FROM t WHERE _tidb_rowid = 100;
```

```sql
+-------------+---+---+
| _tidb_rowid | a | b |
+-------------+---+---+
|         100 | 3 | z |
+-------------+---+---+
```

> **Warning:**
>
> `tidb_opt_write_row_id` is intended for import and migration scenarios. It is not recommended for regular application writes.

## Restrictions

- You cannot create a user column named `_tidb_rowid`.
- You cannot rename an existing user column to `_tidb_rowid`.
- `_tidb_rowid` is an internal row handle. Do not treat it as a long-term business key.

> - On partitioned non-clustered tables, `_tidb_rowid` values are not guaranteed to be unique across partitions. After `EXCHANGE PARTITION`, different partitions can contain rows with the same `_tidb_rowid` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On partitioned non-clustered tables, `_tidb_rowid` values are not guaranteed to be unique across partitions. After you execute `EXCHANGE PARTITION`, different partitions can contain rows with the same `_tidb_rowid` value.
```

---
title: _tidb_rowid
summary: Learn what `_tidb_rowid` is, when it is available, and how to use it safely.
---

# _tidb_rowid

> `_tidb_rowid` is a hidden system column that TiDB uses as the row handle for tables that do not use a clustered index. You do not declare this column in the table schema, but you can reference it in SQL when the table uses `_tidb_rowid` as its handle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_tidb_rowid` is a hidden system column that TiDB uses as the row handle for tables that do not use a clustered index. You cannot declare this column in the table schema, but you can reference it in SQL when the table uses `_tidb_rowid` as its handle.
```

In the current implementation, `_tidb_rowid` is an extra `BIGINT NOT NULL` handle column managed by TiDB.

> **Warning:**
>

> > - Do not assume `_tidb_rowid` is globally unique in all cases. For partitioned tables that do not use clustered indexes, executing `ALTER TABLE ... EXCHANGE PARTITION` can leave different partitions with the same `_tidb_rowid` value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - Do not assume that `_tidb_rowid` is globally unique in all cases. For partitioned tables that do not use clustered indexes, executing `ALTER TABLE ... EXCHANGE PARTITION` might result in duplicate `_tidb_rowid` values across different partitions.
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE t (a INT, b VARCHAR(20));
INSERT INTO t VALUES (1, 'x'), (2, 'y');

SELECT _tidb_rowid, a, b FROM t ORDER BY _tidb_rowid;
```

```sql
+-------------+---+---+
| _tidb_rowid | a | b |
+-------------+---+---+
|           1 | 1 | x |
|           2 | 2 | y |
+-------------+---+---+
```

To inspect the next value that TiDB will allocate for the row ID, use `SHOW TABLE ... NEXT_ROW_ID`:

```sql
SHOW TABLE t NEXT_ROW_ID;
```

```sql
+-----------------------+------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------+
| DB_NAME               | TABLE_NAME | COLUMN_NAME | NEXT_GLOBAL_ROW_ID | ID_TYPE     |
+-----------------------+------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------+
| update_doc_rowid_test | t          | _tidb_rowid |              30001 | _TIDB_ROWID |
+-----------------------+------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------+
```

## Write `_tidb_rowid`

By default, TiDB does not allow `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, or `UPDATE` statements to write `_tidb_rowid` directly.

```sql
INSERT INTO t(_tidb_rowid, a, b) VALUES (101, 4, 'w');
```

```sql
ERROR 1105 (HY000): insert, update and replace statements for _tidb_rowid are not supported
```

> If you need to preserve row IDs during data import or migration, enable the system variable [`tidb_opt_write_row_id`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_write_row_id) first:

Reviewer 2: This sentence makes the import or migration scenario and the prerequisite (`tidb_opt_write_row_id`) clear.

## When `_tidb_rowid` is available

`_tidb_rowid` is available for tables whose row handle is not a clustered primary key. In practice, this means the following table types use `_tidb_rowid`:

- Tables without a primary key
- Tables whose primary key is explicitly defined as `NONCLUSTERED`

`_tidb_rowid` is not available for tables that use a clustered index, including the following:

- Tables whose integer primary key is the clustered row handle
- Tables with a clustered index on a composite primary key

The following example shows the difference:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (a INT, b VARCHAR(20));
CREATE TABLE t2 (id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY NONCLUSTERED, a INT);
CREATE TABLE t3 (id BIGINT PRIMARY KEY CLUSTERED, a INT);
```

For `t1` and `t2`, you can query `_tidb_rowid`:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SELECT _tidb_rowid, a, b FROM t1;
SELECT _tidb_rowid, id, a FROM t2;
```

For `t3`, `_tidb_rowid` is unavailable because the clustered primary key is already the row handle:

> {{< copyable "sql" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

+-------------+---+---+
| _tidb_rowid | a | b |
+-------------+---+---+
|           1 | 1 | x |
|           2 | 2 | y |
+-------------+---+---+
```

To inspect the next value that TiDB will allocate for the row ID, use `SHOW TABLE ... NEXT_ROW_ID`:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SHOW TABLE t NEXT_ROW_ID;
```

```sql
+-----------------------+------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------+
| DB_NAME               | TABLE_NAME | COLUMN_NAME | NEXT_GLOBAL_ROW_ID | ID_TYPE     |
+-----------------------+------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------+
| update_doc_rowid_test | t          | _tidb_rowid |              30001 | _TIDB_ROWID |
+-----------------------+------------+-------------+--------------------+-------------+
```

## Write `_tidb_rowid`

By default, TiDB does not allow `INSERT`, `REPLACE`, or `UPDATE` statements to write `_tidb_rowid` directly.

```sql
INSERT INTO t(_tidb_rowid, a, b) VALUES (101, 4, 'w');
```

```sql
ERROR 1105 (HY000): insert, update and replace statements for _tidb_rowid are not supported
```

If you need to preserve row IDs during data import or migration, enable the session variable `tidb_opt_write_row_id` first:

> {{< copyable "sql" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
